---
layout: post
title: Goodbye Wordpress - Hello Jekyll!
date: 2021-04-18
---


# Goodbye Wordpress, Hello Jekyll!

I started using Wordpress when setting up my personal blog back in summer 2017. But increasingly, I wanted a change. This is why I moved to another solution, a personal website built via a static site generator and hosted with Github Pages. In this post, I want to explain in very simply and non-techy terms how I set up this new personal website and why I chose to do so. This is mainly for my personal reference so I don't forget what I've learnt.

## The Big Picture

It's always good to begin with the end in mind. What is my goal? What am I trying to achieve with my website? And how "techy" do I want to go? 

## Introduction to Static Site Generators

Jekyll is an open source static site generator. What is a static site generator, or SSG for short? Let's first look at the "site generator" part of it. In simple terms, an SSG is just like a function. It takes input (markdown files as content, templates) and generates output (html files, ready-to-show web pages). These html files can then be uploaded to a serve and be viewed in a browser.

The "static" part means that there is no database behind the content. Whereas Wordpress manages content in a database and retrieves the relevant piece of content when it is requested, the SSG generates html pages in advance in a build process. A SSG, as the name suggests, obviously only works for static sites. Dynamic sites on the other hand are in a constant state of change (think Twitter, Youtube etc.). Therefore, for dynamic sites a database is necessary because the displayed content always changes.

For a personal website however, where the content rarely changes and only when I choose to upload something new, a SSG is a good choice. This is then what happens:

1. I create a static site that consists mainly of html pages
2. I take the static site created by SSG and deploy it to the server
3. When a user requests a page, the server finds the matching file and send it to the user, who sees it displayed in their browser

### Benefits of SSG

1. Reducing site complexity: SSGs
2. No need to manage databases and therefore higher security
3. Low to no cost for support and maintenance

One disadvantage of SSG is that it requires a few more technical skills. After all, tools like Wordpress are so great because they are so user-friendly and operate according to "What you see is what you get". You just drag and drop your components of your website. This is not the case for SSG. 

### Types of SSG

There are many different SSG out there, due to their growing popularity over the last couple of years. Jekyll, Gatsby, Hugo, Eleventy ... you name it! 

## How does Jekyll work?

I chose Jekyll because it has good documentation and is tightly integrated with Github Pages, where I was planning to host my website.

Jekyll is written using the language Ruby. A Ruby gem is a package of Ruby code that you can download and install. Gems have specific functionality and can perform actions. For example, *Bundler* is a gem that installs all gems in a *Gemfile*. A *Gemfile* include the list of gems used by the site. When using a Gemfile, you can use the following command to build your site:

```
bundle exec jekyll serve
```

Jekyll has built-in support for Github Pages.



## Github Pages

Github Pages is a hosting service for static sites. It takes the files from a github repository and publishes a website. In some sense, it is just acting as a web server. The great thing about it: It's free! The site with a github.io domain is automatically generated by Github Pages when pushing the source files. In concrete terms, this means: I write a new blog post, like this one, commit to the Github repository that is being used to host my website and then the website will be automatically built to publish the new article. Like magic!

#### Themes in Github Pages

This is where it gets *creative*. 